---
date: 2025-05-14
categories:
  - Programming
---

# `dm-crypt` Causing System Freezes

For the past year, I had been having frequent system freezes on my [NixOS] desktop and laptop. The system would become completely unresponsive, to the point where only SysRq commands would work.

<!-- more -->

The freezes occured particularly often, and repeatably, during the following events:

- `nixos-rebuild`
- Downloading large files e.g. a 33GB Immich album

Initially I thought the issue was due to the IO scheduler being used (`mq-deadline` on my desktop with a SATA SSD, `none` on my laptop with an NVME SSD). However, even after changing the scheduler, there was no improvement.

??? note "The IO scheduler"

    You can check the scheduler being used for a particular device with:

    ```sh
    ❯ cat /sys/block/nvme0n1/queue/scheduler
    none mq-deadline kyber [bfq]
    ```

    To change the scheduler:

    ```sh
    ❯ echo none | sudo tee /sys/block/nvme0n1/queue/scheduler
    none
    ```

    Generally, `bfq` is recommended for interactive systems as it guarantees disk latencies similar to idle, at the expense of throughput.

    You can see a comparison of schedulers [here][scheduler-comparison], as well as on the [Arch Linux Wiki].

## The Culprit

As part of exploration I ran `sar -d 1`, and noticed that the average disk queue size (`aqu-sz`) became excessively large during the above operations.

I found that by simulating large writes (e.g. with `openssl rand -out bigfile.bin $((1024 * 1024 * 30000))`), I was able to increase the queue size, to the point where disk utilization hovered at 100% and thereafter the system would lockup.

Finally, I found an article on Reddit that suggested `dm-crypt` was the [culprit]. Turns out, Cloudflare also did a [writeup] on the issue.

Essentially, `dm-crypt` maintains a separate workqueue for IO, which is actually unnecessary on fast drives like SSDs. For reasons I do not fully understand yet, this can severely degrade performance under load. I suspect this is due to running the IO scheduler over a workqueue (in this case, a sorted binary tree), instead of allowing it to access block IO directly.

## Fixing

You can check whether `dm-crypt` uses the workqueues:

```sh
❯ sudo dmsetup table
luks-primary: 0 487315456 crypt aes-xts-plain64 :64:logon:cryptsetup:7b61f149-1dc8-499b-b5b6-078e05031c1b-d0 0 8:2 32768 2 no_read_workqueue no_write_workqueue
vg-nixos: 0 487309312 linear 254:0 2048
```

In the example above, the workqueues have already been disabled (`no_read_workqueue` and `no_write_workqueue` respectively).

To change them:

```sh
# Temporary
# To make persistent, add --persistent
cryptsetup --perf-no_read_workqueue --perf-no_write_workqueue refresh DEVICE
```

[culprit]: https://old.reddit.com/r/linux/comments/zkyzmh/if_your_system_is_installed_on_dmcrypt_and/
[writeup]: https://blog.cloudflare.com/speeding-up-linux-disk-encryption/
[Arch Linux Wiki]: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Improving_performance#Tuning_kernel_parameters
[NixOS]: https://github.com/extrange/nixos-config
[scheduler-comparison]: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_enterprise_linux/8/html/managing_storage_devices/setting-the-disk-scheduler_managing-storage-devices#available-disk-schedulers_setting-the-disk-scheduler)
